On the morning of the great revolution 
I cleaned my drafting pens thoroughly 
knowing 
they would not be used for a long long time. 
The stockman was drunk on something 
so I helped myself to pencils and paper 
and sketched at the window 
faces and flags, the shapes of laughter. 

The iron works stoked up its engines 
though the machinists only stood and talked 
so at noon when the great revolution arrived 
in a car full of sailors waving red flags 
the steam whistles blasted a welcome 
far louder than the cathedral bells. 

The streets filled with singing and dancing 
the mounted police were nowhere in sight 
the mayor's office was empty, the door unlocked 
and soon the red flag hung from his window. 
I wrote my resignation in fine Gothic script 
and set off for home 
all the drawings in my head 
celebrating their hour of liberation. 

For the soldiers had not yet hobbled home 
and this was victory. 
As we always knew it would 
peace had won. 

People told me Kurt came from Hannover, 
as if that said everything about him -- 
his accent, his high starched collar, 
his need for a wife and an income, 
even the way he used the word Art. 
But I didn't care where he came from 
the night he introduced himself 
in the Café des Westens. 
"I'm a painter," he said, 
"and I hammer my pictures together." .. 

Well, it was the month of Rosa Luxemburg 
and from where I stood, 
beside the workers in the streets of Berlin, 
it seemed possible, it seemed right 
to hammer together a future 
from the debris of Verdun and Versailles. 
"You're just the comrade we need," I told him, 
and now more than ever 
I'm convinced I was right. 

But Rosa was shot without trial, 
and Kurt -- dismissed with no hearing. 
He wasn't committed to the cause -- 
he published in Der Sturm -- 
what more need be said against him? 
"You're not dada," they threw at him 
He only shrugged, "I'm not anti-dada either." 
And that was all, he went home 
(it's then I learned to place his accent), 
and we laughed, thinking we'd heard the last of him. 


It's not true, what one or two 
self-important men have said 
-- that I left Berlin in a sulk -- 
I never meant to stay. 

I left revolution to the martyrs 
and finding the few I could show my works 
I made them my friends for life -- 
Walden, Lissitsky, Hausmann, Hannah Hoech 

and Arp, who when he saw my first collages 
erupted in a stammer, telling 
how once he tore up a sketch in frustration 
-- later found what he wanted 
in how the pieces landed on the floor 
and pasted them down that way. 

That's what I needed to hear -- 
not "I make them in protest against beauty" 
but "I like it that way, it speaks to me." 

He pulled one from my folio to admire 
-- the one with MERZ in the middle 
clipped out of a COMMERZBANK ad. 
"What's it called?" 
I shrugged. "Merz picture; merzbild." 
"But of course!" 

And in an instant 
what had spun in my head for days 
resolved. 
"I call them all merzbilden. 
Merz, not schmerz, is the core of my art." 

"So you're Mr. Merz!" Arp laughed, 
and I was laughing still 
when I boarded the slow train for home. 

"In Merz painting the box top, the playing card, the newspaper clopping become surfaces, string, brusAstroke, and pencil stroke become line, wire netting becomes overpainting, pasted-on wax paper becomes varnish; cotton wool becomes plasticity." 

The butcher throws out little more 
than bone chips and odd ends of string 
knotted in blackened gristle. 

The print shop's bin is bulging, though, 
with the primitive authority of the alphabet, 
the naked cyan of colour discards, 

while the tailor's and ah the dressmaker's shops 
trail scraps of gleam and shimmer down the alley; 
the milliner's barrel runs over with ribbon. 

If you're going on from here, be sure 
to bring a strong bag or basket; 
next comes the tanner's, the machine shop 
and, ah paradis, the dump 
where all the cast-off dreams are thrown. 

O you, beloved of my twenty-seven senses, I 
love your! 
You your thee thine, I your, you mine. -- we? 
This (by the way) is beside the point. 
Who are you, uncounted woman? you are 
-- are you? People say you are, -- let 
them say it, they don't know how it stands with us. 
You wear your head on your feet and walk about 
on your hands, on your hands you walk. 
Halloo your red dress, sliced in white pleats. 
Red I love Anna Bloom, red I love your! -- You 
your thee thine, I your, you mine. -- we? 
This belongs (by the way) out in the cold. 
Red bloom, red Anna Bloom, what do people say? 
Prize question: 1. Anna Bloom has a screw loose. 
                       2. Anna Bloom is red. 
                       3. What colour is the screw? 
Blue is the colour of your yellow hair. 
Red is the thread of your green screw. 
You simple girl in simple dress, you dear 
green animal. I love your! you your thee thine, I 
your, you mine. -- we? 
This belongs (by the way) in the ashcan. 
Anna Bloom! Anna, a-n-n-a, I trickle your 
name. Your name drips like soft tallow. 
Do you know it, Anna, do you know already? 
You can be read from behind, and you, you 
loveliest of all, you are from behind as you are 
from the front: "a-n-n-a." 
Tallow trickles softly over my back. 


Then came Anna Bloom, and Kurt was famous. 
"For all the wrong reasons, of course," he said, 
but clearly, from his grin, he enjoyed it. 

-- Anna Bloom is out of her tree! 
    Anna Bloom is red. 
    What colour is the tree? 

That's how a schoolboy teases his sweetheart, 
not satire at all; and in this age 
(so we dadas proclaimed) art must be savage 
-- a frontal attack! 

But Kurt held a mirror up to dada 
-- reversed its sneer 
to a laughing face. 
He called our southern tour "Anti-Dada" 
and added an "h" to my Hanna(h)'s name 
so he could read her backward. 

"Inspiration," the false artist says, 
"it just comes to me." And it shows. 
His pictures are as like as the four walls of his room 
-- morning, evening, midnight, noon. 

For myself, I have to search for it. 
The whole world is your palate, 
but only if you reach, 
take hold of what you need and pocket it. 

I've walked every street of this town, 
know every crumbling curb, 
old bullets' pockmarks in the brick, 
the unsifted rubbish piles where treasures 
sometimes rise from the ashes. 

In getting around, the first thing 
is to be able to stop. 
That's why I rely on my bicycle -- 
a sturdy old clunker, no gears or gadgets 
to let me down far from home, 
but a basket of course, 
to carry pockets' overflow. 

If you must take the train 
go fourth class, ride the local. 
Avoid motor cars and express trains. 

Get to know your travelling companions 
and don't dwell on your destination. 
Remember, at any station you may step down 
stay the night or the morning 
rummage in a flea market or listen to gossip. 

The whole world is your palate. 
But only if you touch it -- take hold! 

A note on airplanes, airships, dirigibles: 
    As already stated, in getting around 
    the first thing is to be able to stop. 

So, Huelsenbeck has put our feud in print -- HA HA 
So he sneers at my bourgeois home -- my child 
who cries, who has to be changed and fed 
So he laughs at my solid wife -- that she's no Anna Bloom 
So families are not dada -- HA -- neither is the future then 
So an artisr has nothing to do with kids, 
with homes, with Christmas trees 
And this is commitment -- HA -- this is communist art 

Well, art is not communist -- not bourgeois either 
It's no club and has no party line 
Not wild nights make an artist -- not drugs or manifestos 
It's art -- HA HA -- that's no secret 
The one who makes art -- he's the artist 
His one duty-to shape the stuff that comes to hand 
So he can't serve two masters -- 
Not art in the service of revolution 
Not revolution at all -- if it fetters art 

These Huelsendadas -- husks of artists -- 
have winnowed out the kernel 
So I spit back at you, Huelsenbeck 
But where you spit venom, I spit art 
I laugh at you -- HA HA -- 
I laugh at you 

This much I understand 
If I loaf bread = 1 mark (today) 
                   = l0 marks (tomorrow) 
              = l0,000 marks (when the government falls) 
           = 1 million marks (next winter) 
then you can keep your Reichsmarks 
it's the bakery I want 
This much I understand of how money matters 

Very good, so I own no bakery 
But I own a house 
A grimy house that smells of onions 
Papa's wedding gift-and I'm glad 
so glad he wasn't rich enough 
-- too practical anyway    too bourgeois -- 
to give me cash 

So my roomers can't pay? 
can barely afford last week's bread? 
Very good, the house is still mine 
It doesn't get stale 
and if the doorframe falls off, very good 
I'll nail the rotting board to my picture 

A mark? You have a mark to pay me? 
Stamped with a row of zeros? Very good! 
I need its grimy grey for my picture 
-- right there in the centre -- 
hand me over the glue pot while you're here. 


Mussolini attends the opera in Milan 
before following his Black Shirts to Rome 
to rescue king and country from anarchy. 

  
Schevenigen on a blustery day 
Beach almost deserted    café chairs 
stand upsidedown on tables    on the terraces 
parasols turn insideout in the wind 
Clouds torn apart like scraps of paper -- 

that one -- I want that one for the blue collage! 

A little boy    I run out after the waves 
and they chase me back     clutching my treasure 
-- no shell or polished stone    but bottle caps -- 
Dutch ale    Norwegian lager    sun bursts 
of pleasure's language -- Sköl! 

Nellie turns cartwheels, skirts flyirlg over her head 
You are Anna -- yes -- you walk on your hands -- you do! 

Döes stands in the surf    his checked suit 
wet to the knees    homburg tipped back 
shaking his fisds at the waves -- "DADA! 
    and the sick are healed    the lame 
    jump up and dance the shimmy -- DADA! 
    and the blind can see" 

Xerxes the conqueror    defeated by the Bosporus 
spectacles splashed    he wades back to us 
    "No use Kürtchen    these waves are deaf 
    as a German bourgeois    and almost as dumb" 

But that's nonsense    just look at them 
They need no one's bluster to raise them 
They see the world in a dada mirror and laugh 
Whooshwhooshwhooshwhoosh    that's their answer 
They're useless and they know it 
They are dada! 
contents

$end
